---
layout: post
title:  "Grammar ESL teachers should know: passive"
date:   2014-04-26 15:53:40
categories:
tags:   grammar teaching ESL
image:  "espresso.jpg"
description: "The passive voice is not a monster. It’s not even a big deal."
---

(This post is the third in a series focusing on bits of grammar that I’ve noticed have confused lots of teachers. [Click here to see Part 1.][part1])

The passive voice is a source of headache for most teachers. Memories of frustrated attempts to make learners “get it” and its reputation as a difficult part of English cloud the fact that there are easy ways to teach it &mdash; that is, if you even want to teach it as a “thing”.

Here are three things most of us are doing wrong with the passive:

1. Teaching it as though it’s a separate verb form
2. Teaching it with ‘by’
3. Asking students to make passive constructions out of context

## The passive is simpler than it looks ##

The passive, as it’s most commonly introduced, is some form of *be* + PP (past participle).

The secret is this: unless there’s a *have* or *had* involved, **treat past participles like they’re adjectives**.

If your learners know how to say *I was hungry*, it’s not much of a stretch for them to say *I was fired*. If they can say *he’ll be rich*, they can also say *he’ll be caught*. Yes, the semantics are often very different between an adjective and a passive, but if someone is having trouble getting the form right, show them this parallel.

There is no need to write out a table of forms like *was/were PP, am/is/are/be PP, has/have been PP, will be PP, is going to be PP* and so on if your learners are already capable of using *be* with adjectives. The form is the same.

## The adjective–PP connection ##

One of the most interesting features of English is that some words are hard to classify as adjectives or past participles because of the way English has evolved. Take *broken*, for example. When you say *the window is broken*, it’s clearly an adjective &mdash; unless you mean that somebody breaks it regularly (*the window is broken every Tuesday*). But how about *the window was broken*? Is it an adjective, or a PP? Was the window in a state of having been broken (adjective), or did somebody break it (PP)?

You may have noticed there are lots of adjectives in English that can also be PPs. Here are a few:

- bored (from the verb *bore*)
- surprised (from the verb *surprise*)
- confused (…)
- shocked
- disgusted
- worried
- scared
- interested
- satisfied
- tired
- relaxed
- overwhelmed

(Also interesting is that some of these words retain similar meanings regardless of whether they are passive or active, but that the passive one has become more common. Compare *I worry* and *I’m worried*, or *I tire* and *I’m tired*. You can see how the former in these pairs tends to sound antiquated/educated/bookish.)

Using these words is a great way to demonstrate to learners that they actually already “know” the passive and use it every day.

## *By* is misleading ##

A lot of textbooks seem to teach the form of the passive like this:

- *be* + PP + by (agent)

Of course, if you teach that to your learners, they’re going to think they need to say *by* every time, when **the whole point of using the passive is that you don’t need to say the *by* part**.

This leads to learners coming up with things like *On Friday, an old treasure chest was found by someone* or *Last month, I was fired by my boss*.

Just say no to *by*. Teach it ad hoc. If somebody needs to include the agent, you can tell them, “Oh, if you need to say what did it, just add *by*.”

## Don’t ask learners to “make passives” ##

This is something probably every teacher has attempted at some point, and it never ends well. Why? Because **the context is equally as important as the form**, especially when it comes to passives.

Here are a few contexts I can think of when a passive is appropriate:

- In news stories, to focus on what happened and not who did it (*A body was found in the river*)
- To focus on a victim rather than a perpetrator (*She was attacked*)
- To avoid or minimize responsibility for something the speaker or speaker’s group did (*Mistakes were made*)
- To sound more academic (*50 milligrams of magnesium were added*)
- When the agent is generalized (*Spanish is spoken in many different countries*)
- When the agent is totally irrelevant (*“Lead” pencils are actually made with graphite*)
- In fixed expressions like *I was born*, *directed by…*, *established 1961*

Of course, if a learner’s L1 is not closely related to English and you try to teach them “when to use the passive” explicitly, both of you are going to have problems. Your European and South American learners are likely to whizz past the others because their languages already use the passive in a very similar way to English, while your Asian learners are likely to try to memorize these “rules” and apply them when speaking, hurting their fluency.

The solution is to **always teach the passive in context**, using real-world texts. Show some newspaper article lead sentences or the like and get them to mimic it, creating their own. Mimicking not only gets them used to the context, it significantly decreases their chances of coming up with nonsense output which you then have to address. They’ll be ready to make their own creations when their brain is comfortable enough with seeing the passive in each context.

Here’s a nice activity to use to focus on the newspaper article version of passives after you’ve shown learners examples of it in its natural habitat. It was adapted from the excellent [Teaching Grammar Creatively][tgc]:

1. Have a memorable & creative newspaper article lead sentence ready to go, such as *A man was eaten by a chicken* or *A broken helicopter was found in the desert*. It’s very important not to use difficult vocabulary here, and make sure it lends itself to a drawing easily.
2. Divide the class into groups of three or four. Explain that they’re going to send one of their group to the front to read the sentence, and then must return to the group and draw it without speaking while the others guess.
3. Call one person from each group up to the front simultaneously, show them the sentence and whisper any meanings of words they don’t understand. When they all understand, send them back.
4. The first group to come up with the exact sentence wins. While they’re doing it, make a new sentence for the next round.

[part1]:  http://sebpearce.com/blog/transitivity
[tgc]: http://amzn.com/0521716098