---
layout: post
title:  "Grammar ESL teachers should know: “to”"
date:   2014-04-23 16:22:31
categories:
tags:   grammar teaching ESL
image:  "espresso.jpg"
description: "The word “to” is small and deceptively complex. Unfortunately, a lot of teachers make it more confusing than it needs to be, partly because of an outdated model of grammar."
---

(This post is the second in a series focusing on bits of grammar that I’ve noticed have confused lots of teachers. [Click here to see Part 1.][part1])

The word *to* is small and deceptively complex. Unfortunately, a lot of teachers make it more confusing than it needs to be, partly because of an outdated model of grammar.

There are two things that need to be cleared up about *to*.

## The infinitive must die ##

The concept of an “infinitive” in English is outdated and based on grammar models of European languages. It has potential to cause a lot of needless confusion.

If you’ve studied a European language, you’ll have probably seen infinitives. They’re the “dictionary form” of the word, and have predictable suffices. In French, they usually end in *-er*, *-re* or *-ir*. In Italian, they end in *-are*, *-ere* or *-ire*; in Portuguese and Spanish, *-ar*, *-er* and *-ir*. In German, it’s usually *-en*. In Russian, -ть or -ти.

Do you notice how infinitives in those languages are different to English? They’re all *one word*. There’s no need for any silliness like putting *to* before the verb. Infinitives make sense in the other languages because *they are a distinct form of the verb*.

What are infinitives used for in the other languages? As an example, let’s use the verb *sing*. Translated: *chanter* (French), *cantare* (Italian), *cantar* (Spanish & Portuguese), *singen* (German).

- *Chanter est un plaisir.*
- *Cantare è divertente.*
- *Cantar es divertido.*
- *Singen macht Spaß.*
- *To sing is fun.*

See that last line? Do you talk like that? Do you know anybody who talks like that? Unless you’re acting out an old play or being poetic, you’d probably say *singing is fun*, using the *-ing* form. That means the “English infinitive” is useless in this situation other than in poetic style (*to be or not to be...*).

Here’s another example:

- *J’aime chanter.*
- *Amo cantare.*
- *Me encanta cantar.*
- *Ich liebe singen.*
- *I love to sing.*

What happened here? Now it doesn’t sound so bad. Still, I know you feel deep down that *singing* sounds more natural here, at least in the way English is currently spoken. It’s the same reason you can use a noun phrase instead of *singing* and it works: *I love pop tarts* or *I love the smell of whiskey*. **Using the *-ing* form of a verb makes it behave like a noun, and you can substitute a noun almost anywhere that you see an *-ing* form** (more on this in another post).

OK, one more:

- *Je veux chanter.*
- *Voglio cantare.*
- *Quiero cantar.*
- *Ich will singen.*
- *I want to sing.*

This time, it’s perfect. Why? How come the first one sounded dreadful, the second one was unnatural, but the third one was good &mdash; while in the other languages, the infinitive was correct every time?

The point is that infinitive verbs in other European languages *actually serve a useful function* &mdash; that is, when you want to talk about the activity in general (*X is fun*), or when you’ve already got one verb and you want to tack on another (*love* + *sing*, or *want* + *sing*).

“Hang on! English uses infinitives all the time! What about *I want to sing*? *To sing* is an infinitive, isn’t it?”

And that brings me to the juicy part.

Get ready for this: in expressions like *I want to sing*, **you’re far better off thinking of the “to” as part of the word before it.** That means the unit to learn is not *want*, it’s *want to*.

Here’s why it makes more sense:

1. *Why are you going to bed so early?* &mdash;*Because I want to.* (You keep the *to* even at the end.) Compare *Why do you want to play chess? —Because I love it* (*love to* sounds weird here).
2. *Want to*, *going to*, *have to* and *have got to* all have contracted spoken forms: *wanna*, *gonna*, *hafta* and *gotta*, but the *gonna* form isn’t used if you’re using *going* in the sense of moving somewhere as opposed to the discrete future form *going to*, e.g. you can’t say *I’m gonna bed.* (Most teachers have already realized that it makes more sense to teach *going to* as one unit &mdash; we just need to extend it to *want to* and *have to*, among others).
3. The only time we really use “to VERB” the same way as the other European languages in daily life is when we’re referring to a verb in a discussion about language (*I’ve just learnt there’s no verb “to be” in Russian!*). Nowadays this is just an idiomatic usage which has grown out of tradition.
4. When people are stuck for words, listen to where they pause. They don’t say *I want… I want… to be able to sing*; they say *I wanna… I wanna… be able to sing.* This suggests people unconsciously regard *want to (wanna)* as one unit, rather than *to be able to*.

My hunch is that English speakers regard *want* and *want to (wanna)* as different lexemes &mdash; the first when you want to get a thing and the second when you want to do something. This shows up in languages outside the Indo-European family; for example, in Japanese, *want* and *want to (wanna)* would be rendered as *hoshii* and *-tai* respectively. Totally different, because they’re different concepts. You can see this in English in (4) above — if a person is trying to articulate a thing that they want, they’ll say *I want... I want... (respect/more money/a real friend)*. But if it’s something they want to do, they’ll say *I wanna... I wanna... (be wealthy/go to Africa/feel normal again).*

Because of this, I teach that *want*, *have* and *need* are all different from *want to (wanna)*, *have to (hafta)* and *need to*. These aren’t the only ones, of course; there are plenty more (*have got to (gotta), seem to, get to, forget to, try to, use(d) to*…).

Thinking of verbs like this gives a truer representation of how verbs work in English, because it reveals what our version of the infinitive really is: **the “bare infinitive”, or base form**.

I’ll go into this in depth in another post, but in a nutshell, there are five forms of the English verb: base, present, past, past participle and *-ing*. Conceptualizing a base form instead of some vague, mysterious infinitive will make things a thousand times easier.

For example, now you can teach verbs like *want* and *want to (wanna)* like this, showing the difference between a thing and something you want to do:

- *I want* NOUN. (e.g. *hot sauce*)
- *I want to* BASE. (e.g. *tell you something*)
- *Don’t you want to* BASE? (e.g. *be a good boy like your brother*)

Teaching verbs like *love* would go like this:

- *I love* NOUN. (Remember, NOUN includes the *-ing* form, so you can say both *I love Crossfit* and *I love picking gooseberries*.)
- *I’d love to* BASE. (*I’d love to come.*)
- *I’d love to* BASE, but CLAUSE. (*I’d love to come, but I’ve got a meeting with my crystal healing specialist.*)
- *What I love to do is* BASE. (*What I love to do is get a family-size pizza and just go to town on it.*)

And now, you can do away with those god-awful “gerund/infinitive/both” lists, because now you just have to teach the chunk and it takes care of both verbs *and* nouns:

- *agree to* BASE (*He agreed to carry out the order.*)
- *admit to* NOUN (*Langly admitted to the murder. / He admitted to killing him.*)
- *continue to* BASE (*We will continue to make demands.*)
- *continue* NOUN (*We will continue our demands. / We will continue making demands.*)
- *ask to* BASE (*He asked to see his wife.*)
- *ask* NOUN *to* BASE (*I asked you to be quiet!*)

When you teach chunks like this for real, it’s better in my opinion to use a “template” example taken from the real world (e.g. *Utah mom admitted to killing her 6 babies* &mdash; not pleasant, but very memorable). If you use that example over and over until it becomes ingrained, your students can just change the words as needed without changing the grammatical pattern. As always, use the raw formula at your discretion.

## Sometimes *to* means *in order to* ##

I see this problem in textbook after textbook: there’s a list of “verbs that take a gerund” and “verbs that take an infinitive”, and inevitably you find verbs like *stop*.

It usually looks like this:

- *stop / to talk / to someone* (first you stop, then you talk)
- *stop / talking / to someone* (first you talk, then you stop)

This analysis is awful and needlessly confusing. What makes those two lines different is not the *timing* of the events, it’s the *meaning*.

What’s really going on here is that the *to* in *stop to talk* means “in order to”. It’s the *reason* you’re stopping. You could say *stop in order to talk to someone*. Think about the meaning of *to* in these cases:

- *I’m going out to buy groceries*.
- *I’m learning English to get a better job.*
- *She didn’t do it to hurt you.*

Notice it’s the same thing as *stop to talk to someone*? In cases like this, it’s madness to treat the *to* and the verb in front of it as one unit (as an infinitive), because the *to* has its own meaning.

A better analysis would look like this:

- *stop* / *talking to someone* (*stop* NOUN &mdash; you could say *Stop that!*)
- *stop* / *to* / *talk to someone*
- *going out* / *to* / *buy groceries*
- *do it* / *to* / *hurt you*

Substitute *why?* for the *to* in the sentences above and you’ve got a nice way to explain it to students.

As a side note, if you’ve got Spanish or Portuguese speakers, they would use *para* in this situation, and French speakers would use *pour*. These words usually correspond to *for* in English, which is why they make mistakes like **I did it for help you* and **I’m going out for buy groceries* (and there’s more proof the infinitive is an incorrect analysis &mdash; other European languages use an infinitive *after* the word that means *in order to*, whereas we use a base form).

Alright. I hope that was clear &mdash; this is a deep topic that encompasses lots of other bits of grammar which I didn’t have space to cover here. If you’ve got any questions, comments or objections, please leave a comment below.

[part1]:  http://sebpearce.com/blog/transitivity

